Do you remember this picture?
Ink drawing?
Of children?
Yes!
Jordan Peterson’s Twelve Rules For Life
book.
For each chapter, the artist had given a beautiful
visual prompt and incorporated the author’s
children.
This one appears in Chapter Number One.
Kids, fine.
But, that aquarium?
The lobsters inside it?
That is what we are going to learn about,
today!
Namaste!
Four Hundred Sixty One is about stories from
deep underwater.
I am not a biologist.
I am not a marine zoologist.
But, from the books I have read, the interesting
things I have encountered, I want to share
with you today.
Let’s get started.
The Starfish.
This is usually found in the seashore.
And, shallow waters.
What lesson can we learn from this Starfish?
We have seen this already.
The regenerative power.
Decentralised regenerative power, to be precise.
A lizard can shed its tail, distract its enemy,
run away, live another day, and grow its tail
back!
Similarly, a Starfish can shed its limb to
distract an enemy.
Or, might get injured and lose one of its
limbs.
It can GROW its limb back.
But, you know what’s even more special about
the Starfish?
Not only can a Starfish with an injured limb
grow its limb back… the limb.. listen to
me.. the limb can grow the Starfish back!
Did you get it?
Goosebumps yet?
That teaches us a lesson.
Decentralisation.
Information duplicated so that even if one
person, one entity, loses it, forgets it,
or is destroyed, it can be brought back from
somebody else.
In a team management scenario, I think it
is such an important lesson.
That is the lesson from the Starfish.
The Sea Turtle.
Swims very well.
Has long flippers.
Is so beautiful to look at, if you have the
right viewpoint.
Rides on water currents.
Is a good scavenger.
What is special about this animal though,
is, it is related to tortoises, it lives long,
it is slow when it needs to be, all that is
fine.
But, the Sea Turtle and the Land Tortoise
differ, the way I see it, on one very important
characteristic.
The Sea Turtle cannot retract its limbs into
its shell.
If you trouble a Tortoise, it will withdraw
its limbs into its shell.
But, the Turtle cannot.
And, I think it is a good lesson for us.
Very often, when faced with difficulties,
challenges, troubles, we think we can just
retract into a shell, wait for the storm to
blow over, and most of the times, it doesn’t
blow over.
So, you need to FACE THE MUSIC.
You don’t have a shell to withdraw into.
You have to react.
You have to do it proactively.
This is the deck you have been dealt with.
That is the lesson this Sea Turtle teaches
me.
The third living thing from deep underwater,
that we are going to see, SEA, is the Seahorse.
Sea Horse.
Some of you may have heard, and you may have
guessed what the lesson is..
Yes..
This is probably one of the very few species
on earth where the Male plays a very important
role in childbirth.
There are an infinitude of living things in
this world, amazing miracles all around, but,
whatever the number of variations, usually,
99 percent of the time, it is the Female of
the species that has to go through the pangs
of childbirth.
Be it pregnancy, be it the carrying, be it
the delivery, it is the Mother who bears the
brunt of that job.
Yes, Daddy does help on the side, but, the
Mother bears it all.
This living thing, once the mating dance is
over, the Mother, the Female, deposits thousands
of eggs into a special pouch that the Father
has.
And, it is not some silly external pouch like
the one in the kangaroo..
It is a pouch that is fed blood..
Like the placenta.
And, it carries its eggs in that pouch for
many weeks.. and once the live young grow
to a particular size, it releases them into
the water.
I think, for too long, we have had this unequal,
imbalanced division of labour.
“Labour” — pun intended.
Man has to play a bigger role, helping the
Woman.
That is the lesson I get from this living
thing.
We can’t even call it an animal — so strange
is it!
Dolphins!
Just the very sight of it brings a wide smile
to your face.
A new kind of energy and vivaciousness.
As playful as a Dolphin, they say.
In fact, if you do some research on the internet,
you would come to know that you can even say
“As smart as a Dolphin”.
They have a developed language; it is just
whistles and clicks, but they have a developed
language.
They can solve puzzles.
There is a community online who think..
the Dolphins are smarter than human beings..
Evolution started in the seas.
Came to the shores.
Crossed into land.
Climbed into trees.
Climbed down again, became humans..
That is how popular belief goes.
But, there is a little branch, in that evolutionary
tree.. where, the animals that were moving
into land, had a change of mind and went back
into the sea.
That is why Dolphins will drown underwater.
They need air to breathe!
Their biology is very different from that
of fish.
What lesson do I take from these?
The advent of evolution, getting better all
the time, need not be a one-way race.
I am the first.
I am the fastest.
I am the tallest.
I am the strongest.
My technology.
Faster and faster.
Better and better.
Need not be a one-way race.
Probably the Dolphins are smart enough to
realise that they don’t need all that we
have surrounded ourselves with.
Sounds odd and strange, I know.
But, when you look at their faces, they seem
to have a smile..
A wistful smile, sometimes.
A playful smile, some other times.
What are they thinking..?
Are they saying, “This is why I warned you
about it all, and asked you to return to the
water?”
Are they smiling at what we have brought upon
ourselves?
Is moving away from technology and reconnecting
with human beings, the physical, biological,
natural way, the right way forward?
That is the lesson I learn from the playful
Dolphin.
The Octopus.
We have seen this earlier too.
We learned that it had nine brains!
Another interesting thing that you may want
to know about the Octopus is.. it has got
no bones!
“No bones” — is a phrase in English.
And, this is what it means.
But, without bones?
What advantage?
It can squeeze itself the smallest of gaps.
Adaptiveness.
Being ready for any eventuality.
Being accommodative.
Saying, “I can manage, I can adjust” is
probably the most important attitude in today’s
fast-changing world.
Darwin’s evolutionary theory didn’t talk
about the survival of the strongest.. or even
the fittest.
It was actually about the survival of the
most adaptable..
Most adaptive.
The fastest adapting animal?
That will rule the game, the theory said.
The Octopus is a ruler, in that sense.
How adaptive can you be?
Keep the Octopus in mind.
Deep underwater, there is this Angler Fish.
This fish plays a cameo role in the Finding
Nemo movie.
Bioluminescence..
A fin has evolved into something that can
act like a trap for other little fish to come
in search of, so that the mouth can eat it.
What lesson do I take from this monster?
There are two ways to react to darkness..
Other than just living in darkness.
One?
You can move towards the light.
Like the sunflower does.
I can turn towards the light.
Chase the light.
The other way?
The Angler Fish teaches us..
Be our own light!
How beautiful!
If you are caught in a quandary, one way would
be to go in search of happiness..
Where is succour..
OR, you can be the giver of light.
You can be the fount of happiness and joy.
Think about it.
The next animal, again from Finding Nemo,
is this fish.
Dory is her name.
But the original species name is Royal Blue
Tang.
This particular fish is excessively forgetful.
Once every few seconds, it catches itself
blanked out, and asks, “Where was I?
What was I saying?”
Forgets its own name too!
When I dug into the research, I learned that
the problem is not widespread across the species
itself..
That a goldfish has an eight-second attention
span, etc, is just an urban myth.
But, there is a lesson we can learn from Dory.
“Forget and Forgive!”
If you can’t remember stuff, you can’t
hold a grudge, can you?!
“You punched me in the face so heartlessly,”
versus “Did you punch me?
Really?
I don’t seem to recall!”
— How different..!
Wise people give a specific piece of advice.
Forgive, but do not forget, they say.
Don’t forget, for you are likely to get
stuck in a very similar problem pretty soon.
But there is a lesson there.
There are things worth forgetting, and probably
you should cultivate that Art, looking at
Dory.
This is the reason I even did this video.
Remember, in the beginning?
That in the Jordan Peterson book, he refers
to lobsters?
I came to know about something unusual, unique,
and quite interesting, about lobsters, when
I read that first chapter.
Lobsters.. deep underwater creatures, they
are basically walkers on the sea floor.
They grow very large..
Some weight as much as seven, or eight kilograms.
They are very territorial.
There are very few places in the hostile ground
deep underwater, where it can find a safe
haven.
But, competitors for those few spots?
Thousands of lobsters competing all the time!
How do they resolve it?
It seems they have a four-level conflict resolution
mechanism.
Level 1 is — they have little jets of liquid
that squirt from under their eye sockets.
“This is my height.
This is my weight.
This is my power.
This is my gender.
This is my mood” they seem to broadcast,
to anybody who cares to come near.
The others broadcast their details too.
These two lobsters receive each other’s
chemicals, and decide, then and there, whether
to boldly get into combat or to slink away
at the sight of more formidable competition.
They will resolve it, it seems.
If that doesn’t work well enough, Level
2.
Level 2 is braggadocio.
“Do you know who I am?
Do you know how great I am?”
They brandish.
They don’t touch.
Most conflicts end at this level itself.
Level 3 — they parry.
They kinda push.. they try to SHOW you how
powerful they are..
That’s Level 3.
Only if that doesn’t work out either, that’s
when Level 4 comes into the game.
Level 4 is deadly.
Push, pull, grab, sever, cut, tear, throw.
It can even tear a limb.
Blind an eye.
And, when such a conflict happens, the lobster
that was thinking it was good, suddenly realises
it isn’t good enough.
It loses.
And, such a losing lobster, … they have
done brain research..
A lobster’s brain is very easy to decode.
A very simple neural network.
And, easily decodable, because of its simplicity
and its size.
And, they have learned, while analysing it,
that the Lost Lobster goes through a transformation
of the brain.
The brain literally dissolves!
And reconfigures!
No old memories.
No old chemicals.
No old structures.
Completely new, submissive, shy, servant brain
forms.
Octopamine and Serotonine.
Octopamine is the slave hormone.
Serotonine is the bragging hormone.
Simply to change this balance, the brain dissolves
and regenerates.
Is there a lesson there, from this strange
game that the Lobster plays underwater?
Everything depends on the mindset.
Mind — Set.
The Lobster has the same strength.
The same muscle.
The same limbs.
The same size.
But, how does it become a slave?
A runaway scamperer?
A coward?
Mindset.
So, whether we are going to be able to do
something or not, is not decided by talent,
it is not skill, it is not the basic structural
powers that we have.
It is the mind that is controlling all this..
Like the Lobster undergoes transformation,
if you can reconstitute your brain, probably
you can become the alpha Lobster in your sea
floor!
Don’t you think?
As a closing thought, we are still under the
sea, aren’t we?
This book that comes to mind when I see the
phrase “Under The Sea”..
We have all read this classic book — haven’t
we?
“20,000 Leagues Under The Sea”..
I read it with great gusto.
This is where Nemo appears first.
Not in the movies!
Captain Nemo!
Nautilus is the ship.
The submarine.
An amazing adventure.
A great story.
I fell for it.
I watched multiple movies.
I read many versions of the book.
But, only very recently, seven or eight years
ago, I learned that it is not “20,000 Leagues
Under The Sea” straight down..!
He has cheated us, Jules Verne.
It is actually, “Under The Sea”, 20,000
leagues of travel.
20,000 Leagues is nearly 1,00,000 kilometers!
Can you really go that far under water?
You will break through off the other end.
We have been cheated!
I am not going to forgive him!
We will meet again, soon!
Thank you!